---
title: "Project"
date: 2024-02-29T12:01:04+01:00
draft: false
---

## Vision

The ultimate goal of this project is the self-determination of Palestine. The project insists on the responsibility of the Western world. It aims to enable a cultural and political shift in Western countries, essentially asking Western leaders candid questions about the huge gap between their words and their actions. The West must finally make a choice between justice and injustice.

Palestinians were robbed of their [right to self-determine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-determination). This is a clear denial of justice, since the 1948 partition plan was supposed to give birth to two countries. Arabs fought Israel and lost every time, giving Israel a justification for not allowing the creation of a state of Palestine. Not only Israel gave itself the right to decide if and when the state of Palestine can be created, it also felt entitled to conquer and colonize even more land. 

The international community [did not allow such annexations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Israeli-occupied_territories), but did not act about it. There is no legitimate reason why Israel is allowed to infringe on the rights of Palestinians without any consequence. The US and their allies are guilty of letting Israel do as it pleases, even though they apply harsher rules to other offenders. In the past 15 years, Netanyahu's Israel has shown only contempt for international rules and cruelty towards Palestinians. Israel does not to fulfill its obligation of justice towards the inhabitants of the territory it controls in Gaza and the West Bank, neither to its Arab citizens. It is established that Israel cannot be trusted to respect international law or human rights. The Western World, most notably the US, still treats Israel as a reasonable partner and a modern democracy. Many countries have economic, military cultural and scientific exchanges with Israel. But from the point of view of the international rule of law,  nowadays Israel is a "rogue state": a country determined to use its power for self-interest without any form of legal or ethical consideration, similarly to a criminal organization.

The US and their allies are at the very least complicit to this illegal behaviour by not even starting to consider any sanction. In fact, we claim that the US and their allies are the main enablers of this behaviour, since Israel has a very clear conflict of interest and should not be left in charge of the territories meant for Palestine. The West has been incredibly unfair, racist and partial by siding with Israel instead of fulfilling their role of neutral third-party. Our view is that Israel's actions, while morally and legally wrong, are guided by self-interest. Thus Israel's behaviour is rational and understandable, but the constant choice of the US and their allies to condone this behaviour is not. Therefore we consider the US and their allies responsible for the conflict and the injustice caused to the Palestinians. By their negligence and their bias, the US and their allies are the first obstacle to a solution in Palestine. As a consequence, we believe that actions intended to resolve the issue should focus primarily on Western countries.

From a broader perspective, we see the Palestinian struggle as a step in the slow evolution of humankind towards less violence. Democracy, the abolition of slavery, women's suffrage, the civil rights movement in the US, the end of Apartheid in South Africa, the decriminalization of homosexuality... all these past (some still present) struggles have brought an irreversible change, because they are inseparable from the evolution of morality. Naturally nothing is perfect and there is no morality standard, but it is easy to see that people cannot accept the violence of slavery anymore, for instance; it used to be acceptable and regular business to enslave people, but it has become totally wrong and evil. There is a tipping point where an injustice which used to be seen as acceptable by most people, gets progressively rejected as morally wrong. We understand the self-determination of Palestine as one of these struggles, and we see signs that the tipping point is getting close. It's now time for another step in this long and proud history towards more peace among humans... It's about time for Palestine!


## Principles

We see the current deadlock and the powerlessness of the international community as caused by the Western world, i.e. the US and their allies. Our primary goal is to convince the public and political leaders of these countries that Israel is a rogue state, and as such it should be boycotted and sanctioned.

- We call for peace, justice, and reconciliation to the extent possible. This is a non-violent movement. We strongly reject violence for both moral and pragmatic reasons.[^1] 
- We strongly reject racism, antisemitism and islamophobia. We do not conflate the state of Israel with Israelis, and obviously we do not conflate Israel with Jews either.
- We condemn Zionism as a toxic ideology rooted in colonialism and racism. We see the creation of Israel in 1948 as a violence inflicted to indigenous people in Palestine in the historical context of colonization and the Holocaust. Nevertheless we accept that Israel has a right to exist. We believe that the violence and the mistakes of the past have to be acknowledged, not used as a reason for more violence.
- We condemn *Netanyahu's Israel*, a term that we use as a shorthand for the extremely intolerant and violent state that Israel turned into under his lead.[^2] Netanyahu's Israel clearly disregards the rights of Palestinians and aims to continue the ethnic cleansing and colonization of Palestine. Netanyahu's Israel clearly follows a logic of domination by force and has no interest in peace. We emphasize that Israel is not the same as Netanyahu's Israel, in the same way that Germany is not the same as Nazi Germany.
- We support the BDS movement and subscribe to their political means of action. We aim to contribute to the same goals by removing the cultural and political obstacles in the West which prevent self-determination in Palestine.

## Approach

There is a very strong inertia about the issue of Palestine. Everybody got used to a stalled situation. Practically, everybody acts as if nothing can change or waits for a solution coming from Israel.[^3] Recent developments encourage this kind of pessimistic and discouraging vision. The resulting inaction is due to various factors, some of the most important ones being:

- The acceptance of an infinite cycle of violence, i.e. considering that the usual tit-for-tat revenge logic is unavoidable. This is a fallacy, every conflict can and must end. At a deeper level, there is the belief that violence has always been and will always be the ultimate answer. This point contributes to explain why conservative people tend to support Israel whereas progressive people usually support the self-determination of Palestine. In order for a shift to happen in the public opinion about Palestine, the different (and often subconscious) visions of the world should be taken into account.

- The supposed complexity of  conflict, causing confusion and even disinterest for a lot of people. We claim that Israel has greatly benefited from this confusion and maintains it through narratives which have to be deconstructed. Once this is done, the truth appears and things are not so complicated. In fact, the apparent complexity of the issue simply masks a clear denial of justice.

There are also indications that [the public opinion is shifting](https://politics.stackexchange.com/q/82982). People are increasingly weary of the cruelty of Netanyahu's Israel towards Palestinians. The intolerance that the state of Israel shows towards Palestinians is becoming anachronistic, and the country is losing support because the divergence widens: on the one hand, a decolonized world which has officially accepted diversity and universal human rights and tries to progress towards this direction. On the other hand, a country which still sees itself as dominant and more worthy of the land that it claims, and dismisses indigeneous claims for justice. Israel still has a good control of the propaganda machine, but it is becoming harder to convey the image of a victim for a country which visibly behaves like a bully. 

For a long time, the [BDS movement](https://bdsmovement.net) has been advocating for boycott and sanctions against Israel. in 20 years, the campaign did not result in significant progress, in part because Israel launched efficient defamatory campaigns accusing the movement of antisemitism. Compared to the successful campaign against the Apartheid regime in South Africa in the 80s, the Palestinian cause lacks a clear moral choice of the public opinion in Western countries. Our approach aims to close this gap by showing that there is an unambiguous question of justice vs. injustice at stake. People in Western democracies see themselves as "good people" and cannot tolerate having a direct responsibility in causing a blatant injustice. Thus our goal is to force people, especially political leaders, to face their responsibilities by evidencing their current support for Israel through unconscious economical, industrial, or cultural choices.

The core of the project consists in exhibiting the contradictions of Western countries which officially pretend to support a two-states solution and criticize the colonization of Palestine, but do not act accordingly and actually even support Israel in every possible way. By doing this, we ask Western people to make a choice between supporting a violent criminal state stealing land and doing what is morally right. This is a challenging communication campaign, because there are many political, sociological and psychological biases at play. In particular, the effect of racism needs to be addressed in a non-polarized way, in such a way that conservative people do not feel defensive. The goal is to reach a broad cultural consensus on the idea that "good guys" support justice for Palestinians, as opposed to the status quo where everyone supports their traditional view. 

The project focuses on the essence of the conflict, as we do not want to be dragged into a protracted and fruitless debate about which side did the most horrible things to the other. The project is purposefully candid in the questions that it asks. These questions have to be discussed and debated before being used in a public campaign for maximum impact. They would be along the following lines: Are you in favor of the right to self-determination? Are you in favor of colonization? If your country was invaded and colonized, would you accept it or would you fight for your freedom? If you would fight, do you see the Palestinians' fight as a reasonable reaction as well? Do you agree that Israel did not have a right to extend beyond the 1967 borders? These questions are intended to frame the debate on rational societal choices, instead of an instinctive and emotional answer in the noisy context of various propaganda. Importantly, the communication campaign also means to awaken the vast majority of people who "don't have an opinion".[^4]


[^1]: Evidently, the unrestrained use of violence in the past 75 years did not lead to a satisfactory outcome.

[^2]: Of course, Benjamin Netanyahu is not the only person responsible. But he is [a representative symbol](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/nov/21/the-netanyahu-doctrine-how-israels-longest-serving-leader-reshaped-the-country-in-his-image) of the increasingly intolerant, violent, discriminating, authoritarian evolution of Israel. 

[^3]: A curious approach to conflict-solving, where third-party countries expect the dominant belligerent country to design and implement a fair for both sides (see [The Fallacy of the Adult in the Room](./pages/the-fallacy-of-the-adult-in-the-room/)).

[^4]: People should realize that they condone injustice if they let their political leaders preserve the current domination of Israel.
